---
date: 2021-08-31
tags:
  - posts
  - directory
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Scratch for aniket
  parent: scratch
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

Using panoply, ensure that you load the `openjdk` module first. I added the following line
to my `~/.bashrc` file to simplify running panoply:
```alias panoply="module load openjdk; bash ${HOME}/PanoplyJ/panoply.sh"```

Note that I downloaded the `PanoplyJ` to the `${HOME}` folder.

My recommendation is to look in the `/scratch/cjablono_root/cjablono0/daniket/`, which is your scratch directory
and find the `.nc` (NetCDF) file generated by our previous model run. Do this in bash first so you know where it is.
Now run panoply and open that `.nc` file. 

At this point you can start generating plots. My first recommendation would be to look at the `PS` field (which is surface pressure).
Create latitude-longitude plots for different temporal snapshots. This will show the evolution of the wave.
The fields `U` and `V` contain, respectively, zonal (east-west) and meridional (north-south) wind. Note that these variables have
an extra dimension compared to `PS`, which is `lev`. This is the vertical level. Surface pressure is only defined at the surface. 
How does the `U` field differ from the `PS` and `V` fields at the first time snapshot? Does the time evolution of PS and V
exhibit similarities?

Probably the most interesting field for this simulation is the temperature field, `T`, given in units of Kelvin. 
What do you notice about the initial distribution of temperature? How does it change at different levels of the model within the first time snapshot?
How does the time-evolution of `T` mirror and how does it differ from the evolution of `U` and `V`. Given that `V` represents wind, 
think about e.g. walking past the door to an air-conditioned building on a hot day when the door opens. Wind coming from inside the building
transports cool air from inside to where you are on the outside. How does that relate to what we're seeing in the `T` field?

